DM-24271: Write description of the alert stream simulator in a box (#2)
lsst-dm/dmtn-149: index.rst

:tocdepth: 1

.. sectnum::

Abstract
========

.. note::
   **This technote is not yet published.**

This document describes a program which simulates Rubin's Alert Distribution
System :cite:`DMTN-093`. This simulator would be useful for development of
community brokers: it would provide a realistic target for the throughput and
data formats they would be expected to handle. In addition, it may be a useful
tool for testing changes to the configuration of Rubin's alert brokers in the
future.

High-level goals
================

A simulator will help groups who are developing community brokers which

> republish Rubin's alert stream. It will provide a realistic benchmark for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive Rubin's alert stream. It will provide a realistic benchmark for the
```

tests.

The simulator should:

 - Provide a realistic stream of alerts, both in terms of volume and in content.
 - Be simple to install on realistic broker hardware
 - Be well-documented
 - Provide tools to make it clear whether a consumer is keeping up with the
   stream volume

Implementation
==============

The simulator will be provided as a set of Docker containers and a
``docker-compose`` file for coordinating those containers. To run the simulator,
the user spins up the docker containers, and then runs a command which starts
the flow of data. The data comes from a directory with serialized alert data on
disk, and is paced into the containerized Kafka broker to match the expected
rate for Rubin. The data will be repeated indefinitely, with timestamps
adjusted, so that long-term behavior can be observed, even if only a few minutes
of source data is available.

Alert data will be serialized using the latest Avro alert event schema. The Avro
schema specification used will be provided along with the containers.

Docker
------

These containers will be provided:

 - A Kafka container, which runs the broker

>  - A Zookeeper container, which the broker connects to for backend state management

Reviewer: Does this need to be run in a separate container?  My memory of the current alert_stream implementation is that Kafka and Zookeeper run in the same container.

Reviewer 2: The `docker-compose.yml` that [we're currently shipping](https://github.com/lsst-dm/alert_stream/blob/2e81daba0ef45c2820b208124aa59d081dc7d094/docker-compose.yml#L3) puts them in separate containers. That seems right to me.

Reviewer: Right you are.  My mental model for what was going on under the hood wasn't high-enough fidelity.

 - A monitoring container, which provides a web-based UI verify that the stream
   is being fully handled

>  - An injector container, which hosts a command that sends data to the broker

Reviewer: I'd also suggest a small demo consumer container to demonstrate receiving the alerts, that users could potentially modify for their own code.

The Kafka broker and monitoring containers will be addressable from the host
running the containers so that the user can consume the stream and check metrics
easily.

Injector and Data Rates
-----------------------

The injector sends data to the broker. It should consume a directory on disk,

> and will repeat the data it finds there indefinitely.

Reviewer 2: I  think this is fine, but this is the area about which I'm most fuzzy in my thinking.

Specifically, I wonder about things like:

- Repeating indefinitely means that at some point things like `alertID`s and `diaObjectId`s will start repeating. Is that a problem?
- Do we need to think about the format in which things are serialized? Is the data on disk in Avro format already, or is there some more efficient dump format that we'll be distributing? (It's probably premature to worry about this.)
- Will it be possible for broker authors to download meaningful subsets of the data? The full 10e6 alert dump in MongoDB form is a few hundred GB as I recall; folks might want to just get 10 minutes of data, or subset by source class, or something.

Author: I'm glad you highlighted this, it's fuzzy to me too.

> Repeating indefinitely means that at some point things like `alertID`s and `diaObjectId`s will start repeating. Is that a problem?

Right, I think this is an example of how non-meaningful the data will be. If it's possible to generate new `alertID`s and `diaObjectID`s and other data on-the-fly and have it be sensible, great! If not, then this will have to only be useful for load tests.

> Do we need to think about the format in which things are serialized? Is the data on disk in Avro format already, or is there some more efficient dump format that we'll be distributing? (It's probably premature to worry about this.)

I think we should do Avro on disk and I don't see any reason to do anything else, really. We can commit the data directly to Github and let them handle distribution of the big blob (icky, I know, but it's straightforward). Alternatively, we could use LSST's git LFS setup, but I don't know how access to that works for third parties.

> Will it be possible for broker authors to download meaningful subsets of the data? The full 10e6 alert dump in MongoDB form is a few hundred GB as I recall; folks might want to just get 10 minutes of data, or subset by source class, or something.

Oh dear, that's bigger than I was picturing. Offering a few sizes seems smart, and maybe we _can't_ distribute it through git if it's that big. I think we need to think more carefully about how we distribute that block of data.

What are our options? The first thing that comes to mind to me is putting it in S3. We could use presigned URLs to make download URLs for the broker authors; we'd give out the URLs over email or something. They get the file(s), and then it's sort of their problem to maintain it. But does LSST already have a beefy FTP server or block store we can use?

Reviewer 2: I suspect @ebellm is really the person to weigh in here — he could help clarify requirements. But off the top of my head:

- Consider making a cmd line option to switch between “loop forever” mode, which will reuse `alertId`s etc, or “single pass” mode, which will just send all the data once and then stop.
- Eric can comment on whether it's actually useful to provide all of these simulated alerts to consumers — I believe his current thinking is that it might be more effective just to provide a relatively small number of precursor events instead. However, if it *is* useful, my first suggestion would be to ask in #dm-infrastructure for hosting ideas.

Reviewer: - I agree that a "loop forever by duplicating data" and a "single pass" switch would be helpful.  While in principle we could edit all the relevant ids on the fly to reuse data it seems like a huge headache--let's wait and see if there's demand for that from the broker teams.
- I think we should plan to provide a large bulk sample of alerts to consumers if (and when) we have it--I suspect it will be instructive for all concerned, especially as we start planning for the Data Previews during commissioning.

Author: I really like the command line switch mechanism too, let's do that.

I'm going to avoid going into detail in this particular doc on how we provide the big dump of data, but I'll ask in #dm-infrastructure.

Maybe we can include a small snapshot of data directly in the repository, perhaps one wave of ~10,000 alerts. That should be less than a gigabyte, probably a lot less if we compress it.

Author: @ctslater and @ktlim suggested serving the data blobs directly off of `$HOME/public_html` on a `lsst-dev` server. We can put hundreds of gigabytes up there and there are no concerns about hogging bandwidth on the outbound flows.

It will attempt to send data at a realistic rate, and will have options to

> increase the rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modify the rate.
```
(Sometimes it may be helpful to lower it)

By default, the "realistic rate" will be to send approximately 10,000 events
every 37 seconds. The events will be sent over a 3 second period, emitted in 189
bursts, each with a random number of events between 10 and 200 (centered at 50).

> This emulates a plausible data rate for Rubin's 189 data-producing CCDs.

Reviewer 2: Should the rate be coupled to the contents of the alerts?

That is, if we have a realistic set of simulated alerts, they should probably be sent based on (simulated) visit ID, rather than simply bunched by number.

Reviewer 2: Of course, if we have “real” alerts from DECam data, we don't want to stick with their cadence — that won't be a good approximation for Rubin.

Author: Sure, emitting based on the `ccdVisitId` makes sense to me. Is that what you're saying?

Reviewer: At risk of overcomplicating this unduly, we might also make this an option: send alerts using native timestamps in the alerts + an offset, or send them in batches of N every deltaT seconds.

Author: Yeah, I suspect that a bunch of controls for the pacing will be nice to have, that's a good call.

containers, injecting data, and monitoring the flow of data.

Known Limitations
=================

The simulator will have to be an approximation of the production stream. Several
details of the implementation remain uncertain, and our estimates of the size of
the data stream might not be accurate. This section lists the known limitations
of the simulation. Of course, there may be more discrepancies between the
simulation and the eventual stream at launch; this is just what we are aware of
now.

Authentication
--------------

The production broker will require community brokers to authenticate to receive
the stream of data. We don't yet know exactly how that will work. Some of the
options like TLS-encrypting the TCP flow might cause the production stream to be
more costly to process than the simulation.

Compression
-----------

We may want to compress the stream of alerts. This could be done using gzip,
snappy, lz4, or some other algorithm. Compression would be a tradeoff; it would
impose additional CPU load on consumers of the stream, but lower the network
bandwidth requirements. It could have a complicated effect on memory pressure
which is hard to predict.

> Making compression an optional feature of the simulation could help us received

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making compression an optional feature of the simulation could help us receive
```

feedback from community broker developers on the effects it has in practice.

Alert Format
------------

The Data Products Definition Document :cite:`LSE-163` sets some requirements on
the contents of alert packets, but the precise Avro schema we will use is still
in development. This could have an impact on the size of alert packets,
affecting the stream volume.

In addition, we have not committed on a particular mechanism for distributing
the alert format and making changes to it. One option is the Confluent Schema
Registry :cite:`confluent-schema-registry`; choosing this option may have
implications on the deserialization performance of consumers.

Alert Contents
--------------

Some community brokers plan to modify or filter the alert stream. We don't yet

> have scientifically meaningful data to populate the alert stream, though. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have large quantities of scientifically meaningful alerts, though. This
```
